# Harmonic Polynomial Cell

This Python code implements the HPC method by
[Shao and Faltinsen](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Yan-Lin+shao+Odd+faltinsen+harmonic).

The Python package for structured-quad-mesh HPC was written in 2016 based on an earlier failed
unstructured-mesh triangle implementation. It was ported to Python 3.12 in 2026 and renamed from 
"hpc" to  **hpcrec** since the revival was based on a need for a fast and accurate method to
**reconstruct** the velocity field below a known wave elevation in 2D with a known potential at the
free surface. Any other features are probably not going to be maintained. 

For sparse linear algebra either PETSc (petsc4py) or SciPy (scipy.sparse) can be used.
On a single processor MUMPS through PETSc and SuperLU through SciPy perform about the same.
For small problems where dense matrices are ok numpy can be used as well.
The assembly of local interpolation matrices is implemented in Cython for speed (optional!), the
rest of the code is pure Python (originally v 2.7, ported to 3.12 in 2026).

**NOTE 1:**
The code also contains an *old* interface with FEniCS to benchmark the HPC method's harmonic
polynomial interpolation vs the more standard continuous Galerkin FEM method with Lagrange
polynomials. That code is not maintained and is not compatible with the latest FEniCSx versions. 

**NOTE 2:**
The PETSc (petsc4py) interface in the code has not been tested since 2016 ... The automated testing
is only applied for numpy and scipy and the main author has no need for a multi-CPU solver using
PETSc right now.


## Usage

A usage example for reconstructing the wave kinematics below a known free surface with a known
free-surface velocity potential, both computed by the Higher Order Spectral Method, HOSM, can be
seen in [this notebook](demos/wamod_h5_reconstruction.ipynb).  


## Developing

The unit tests can be run using [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), just call
```bash
uv run pytest -v
```
in the repository root. 


## About *hpcrec*

The *hpcrec* Python code is developed by Tormod Landet.

Issues and pull requests are welcome, but beware that it may be *months* or *years* between each
time I can (or want to) set aside time for maintenance, so do not expect quick replies or regular
updates!
There is a gap of 10 years between two commits in the repo, so I guess that says something about the
speed of development... There is a high chance the repo will never be updated again if I find that
FEM reconstruction or some other method is a faster and simpler way to get what I need
(for work @ DNV).


## The HPC method

The HPC method solves the Laplace equation for an unknown function $\phi$ on a domain $\Omega$
completely enclosed by non-overlapping boundaries $\Gamma_D$ and $\Gamma_N$ such that
$\partial\Omega = \Gamma_D \cup \Gamma_N$. 

The equations to solve are hence

$$
  \begin{aligned}
    \nabla^2 \phi &= 0 \quad \text{ in } \Omega \\
    \phi &= g_D \quad \text{ on } \Gamma_D \\
    \frac{\partial \phi}{\partial \mathbf{n}} &= g_N \quad \text{ on } \Gamma_N.
  \end{aligned}
$$

We approximate the domain $\Omega$ by a tesselation $\mathcal{T}$ which consists of overlapping
quadrilateral cells, $\mathcal{K}$.
We use harmonic polynomials, i.e polynomials that satisfy Laplace's equation, to approximate the
solution $\phi_h$.
In 2D these polynomials can be generated by taking the real and imaginary part of $(x + iy)^n$ for
increasing $n$.

The first ten such polynomials are

$$
    \begin{array}{llll}
      f_1(x,y) =& 1                      & f_6(x,y)=& x^3 - 3 x y^2 \\
      f_2(x,y) =& x                      & f_7(x,y)=& 3 x^2 y - y^3\\
      f_3(x,y) =& y                      & f_8(x,y)=& x^4 - 6 x^2 y^2 + y^4  \\
      f_4(x,y) =& x^2 - y^2 \qquad\qquad & f_9(x,y)=& x^3y - x y^3 \\
      f_5(x,y) =& xy                     & f_{10}(x,y)=& x^5 - 10 x^3 y^2 + 5 x y^4
     \end{array}
$$

Each of the overlapping structured quadrilateral cells contains in total 9 vertices.
We require that the value of $\phi=\phi_9$ at the centre vertex named 9 in the figure below is
determined by a harmonic polynomial that exactly interpolates the 8 neighbour vertices.
Every vertex has a degree of freedom corresponding to the value of $\phi_i$ in the vertex and every
vertex is the centre of its own cell, i.e every vertex value is interpolated from its neighbours.
The cells are overlapping and the value $\phi(x,y)$ is only uniquely defined in the vertices.
Between the vertices multiple solutions corresponding to multiple sets of interpolating polynomials
are valid.
  
```text
  1 --- 2 --- 3
  |     |     |
  |     |     |
  4 --- 9 --- 5
  |     |     |
  |     |     |
  6 --- 7 --- 8
```

To find the interpolating polynomial for each vertex we assemble a local matrix $\mathbf M$ with
elements $M_{ij} = f_j(x_i, y_i)$ where the neighbour number is $i\in[1,8]$ and the harmonic
polynomials are numbered $j\in[1,8]$.
We use constant polynomial expansion coefficients $\mathbf b$ to weight the polynomials and we can
find these by inverting the local matrix

$$
\begin{aligned}
  \mathbf{\phi} &= \mathbf{M b}  \\
  \mathbf{C} &= \mathbf{M}^{-1} \\
  \mathbf{b} &= \mathbf{C \phi}
\end{aligned}
$$

If we use a local coordinate system origin when assembling $M_{ij}$ such that
$(x_i,\ y_i) = (0.0,\ 0.0)$ then only polynomial $f_1$ will be non zero at vertex 9.
We hence need only determine $b_1$ and we can see that the value of $\phi_9$ will be the first row
of $\mathbf C$ dotted with $\mathbf \phi$.
We enter this relation into the global system matrix, $\mathbf A$ in the row corresponding to the
unknown in the given vertex.

On the boundaries the Dirichlet boundary conditions are set directly into the global system matrix
$\mathbf A$.
The Neumann boundary conditions are enforced by taking i.e vertex 4 on the left boundary on the
domain to be the "centre" of its surrounding neighbours and calculating the matrix $\mathbf C$ as
above.
By a similar argument we also see that the derivatives in the $x$ and $y$ directions are governed
only by $b_2$ and $b_3$ respectively.
These relations are also entered into the global matrix $\mathbf A$.

The final global matrix $\mathbf A$ will be very sparse with at most 9 non zeros per row.
This implementation uses SciPy (SuperLU, UMFPACK, various Krylov subspace iterative methods) or
PETSc (SuperLU, UMFPACK, MUMPS, various Krylov subspace iterative methods) for solving the resulting
sparse linear system.

The code can also compute double derivatives of the potential,
$\nabla(\nabla\phi)=$ `grad(grad(phi))`.
Performing the calculation we will find that only polynomials $f_4$ and $f_5$ will give non-zero
tensors at $x=y=0$:

$$
\nabla\nabla f_4 = \begin{bmatrix}2 & 0 \\ 0 & -2\end{bmatrix}
\qquad\qquad
\nabla\nabla f_5 = \begin{bmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0\end{bmatrix}
$$
